# Frequently seen errors and how to fix them

These are error messages that we see come up often when working with code or
development workflows that have not been updated to accommodate the
free-threaded build. We also provide suggested fixes. Please send in pull
requests to [the repository for this
document](https://github.com/quansight-labs/free-threaded-compatibility) if you
run into any confusing free-threading-specific errors that you suspect apply to
other libraries and aren't covered here.

## Cython compilation errors: `unknown type name '__pyx_vectorcallfunc'`

This happens if you try to build a Cython extension for the free-threaded build
using the current stable release of Cython (3.0.11 at the time of writing). The
current stable release of Cython does not support the free-threaded build. You
must either install the Cython 3.1 beta by passing `--pre` to `pip`:

```
pip install cython --pre
```

use the nightly wheel:

```bash
pip install -i https://pypi.anaconda.org/scientific-python-nightly-wheels/simple cython
```

or build Cython from the `master` branch [on
Github](https://github.com/cython/cython).

See [the porting guide](porting.md) for more detail about porting Cython code to
work under free-threading.

The beta and nightly wheel are pure-python builds, so they work on all
architectures. The pure-python version of Cython is usually only marginally
slower than a compiled version, so you should default to installing a
pre-release wheel in CI instead of compiling Cython, which can take up to a few
minutes on some CI runners.

You may wonder why `pip install cython` succeeds on the current stable Cython
release if free-threaded Python is not supported. This is because Cython ships a
pure-python wheel tagged with `py2.py3-none-any`, which pip will install if it
cannot find another wheel that is compatible. Since there isn't a free-threaded
wheel, pip installs the pure Python wheel instead, and there is no opportunity
to catch this case at install time in e.g. a `setup.py` file. The Cython 3.1
release will fix this problem once and for all.

## What does `RuntimeWarning: The global interpreter lock (GIL) has been enabled` mean?

This happens when python imports a module defined in a native extension that
does not explicitly declare support for running without the GIL. By default,
native extensions do not support running without the GIL because of the long
history of extensions assuming the GIL locks concurrent access to extension
internals. As a precaution, when the free-threaded Python build imports such an
extension, it assumes that the GIL is *necessary* to run the extension, and
enables the GIL at runtime.

If you have control over the code in the native extension, then you should
update the extension to support the free-threaded build. See [the guide
section](porting-extensions.md) on that topic. If you do not control the
extension or simply want to test running with the GIL disabled despite the
extension not explicitly supporting it, then you can set either the `PYTHON_GIL`
environment variable or the `-X gil` command-like flag for the python
interpreter to `0` (i.e. the GIL is disabled). This skips the runtime check for
whether extensions support running with the GIL disabled. See the [section on
running free-threaded Python](running-gil-disabled.md) for more details.

## `pip install jupyter` fails

This happens because some of the dependencies of the `jupyter` project on PyPI
do not yet support the free-threaded build. In particular, `argon2-cffi` uses a
C extension provided by the `argon2-cffi-bindings` project, which in turn uses
CFFI to generate bindings for the `argon2` C password hashing library.

Because CFFI does not yet ship a stable release that supports the free-threaded
build, even if you have a compiler environment properly set up, the
`argon2-cffi-bindings` build will fail.

For now, we do not recommend trying to install jupyterlab into an environment
managed by a free-threaded Python interpreter. Instead, we suggest installing a
free-threaded Python kernel into a jupyterlab installation managed by a
GIL-enabled python interpreter. See [our instructions](installing_cpython.md#installing-a-jupyter-kernel) for
installing a free-threaded Jupyter kernel for more details.

That said, it *is* possible to install `jupyter` into a free-threaded Python
environment and launch jupyterlab, [see this
issue](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab/issues/16915#issuecomment-2810114545)
for more details.

## What does "Py_LIMITED_API is currently incompatible with Py_GIL_DISABLED" mean?

You might see an error with this message generated by setuptools, but other
tools might generate similar errors for the same reason.

The ultimate problem is that CPython does not yet offer a [stable
ABI](https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/stable.html#stable-application-binary-interface)
on the free-threaded build. See [this CPython
issue](https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/111506) for more details. This
means it's not yet possible to build an extension that any CPython version can
import and instead libraries have to distribute one wheel for each version of
free-threaded CPython. A future version of CPython will likely support a new
version of the stable ABI that works correctly with both the GIL-enabled and
free-threaded builds.

Until then, tools or libraries that *default* to using the stable ABI via the
limited API will generate build errors on the free-threaded build. The fix is
usually to disable the `Py_LIMITED_API` declaration that triggers use of the
stable ABI on the free-threaded build by using the following incantation:

```
import sysconfig
FREETHREADED_BUILD = bool(sysconfig.get_config_var("Py_GIL_DISABLED"))
```

If you spell it this way, `FREETHREADED_BUILD` will be `False` on the
GIL-enabled build and `True` for free-threaded builds.
